.TH shapes1 "2007-12-18" "Tiddes" "The Shapes language compiler"
.ensure-newline.TP
.B Note:
Due to limitations in the character encoding used for this page, some characters in the examples have been replaced by legacy substitutions.  These issues are not present in the
.SM HTML
version of this page.
.SH NAME
shapes \- Compile a Shapes source to PDF.


.SH SYNOPSIS
.B shapes
.B option
*
.I "source"


.B shapes
.B option
*


.B shapes
(
.B options
|
.B file-request
)*


.SH DESCRIPTION
.B shapes
compiles a source file written in the Shapes language (with file name extension 
.I shape
).  On success, this results in a PDF file containing a viewable representation of the graphics described by the source.


.SH COMMAND LINE OPTIONS
Command line options fall into two cathegories, most of which were referred to as 
.B option
above.  The others, found in the last subsection below, are used to request which files would be used under given circumstances, and will cause the compiler to terminate without processing any files, these options were referred to as 
.B file-request
above.


.SS Files

					


.B "source"
.br
When the source is specified as the last command line argument, it may have either of the forms 
.I indir/basename
, 
.I indir/basename.
, or 
.I indir/basename.shape
; they all mean the same (here 
.I indir/
just indicates that the file may be located in another directory).  This also specifies a filename base (excluding 
.I indir/
and the 
.I .shape
suffix), which in turn provides names for all other files involved.


					


.B "--tmpdir"
.I dir
.br
Specify directory for temporary files.  See also the environment variable SHAPESTMPDIR.


					


.B "--outdir"
.I dir
.br
Specify directory for products.  Defaults to current working directory.


					


.B "--needpath"
.I dir
.br
.BI "-N" "dir
.br
Add dir to the end of the search path for language extension sources.  See also the environment variable SHAPESINPUTS.


					


.B "--base"
.I filenamebase
.br
Specify the filename base to derive other filenames from.


					


.B "--in"
.I file
.br
Specify the input source.  Defaults to the basename with the suffix 
.I .shape
in the current directory.


					


.B "--prepend"
.I str
.br
Prepend the given string to the input source.


					


.B "--out"
.I file
.br
Specify the destination file.  Defaults to the basename with the suffix 
.I .pdf
in the output directory.


					


.B "--labeldb"
.I file
.br
Specify the file where to store labels between iterations.  Defaults to the basename with the suffix 
.I .labels.pdf
in the output directory.


					


.B "--afmout"
.I file
.br
Specify the file where to store generated font metrics, would there be any.  Defaults to the basename with the suffix 
.I .afm
in the output directory.


					


.B "--fontmetricspath"
.I dir
.br
.BI "-M" "dir
.br
Add dir to the end of the search path for font metrics.


					


.B "--no-resources"
.br
Inhibit use of files installed with the Shapes program.  This applies both to language extensions and font metric files.


					


.B "--no-iteration"
.br
Inhibit creation of the file with labels saved from one program run to another.  This behavior is implied if the label database filename is undefined.


					


.B "<stdin>"
.br
The special file 
.I stdin
is used when the input source is not determined in any other way.  This means that the filename base must not be defined, so sometimes 
.I #shapes
has to be used instead.


					


.B "<stdout>"
.br
Since the user may write charater data on the special file 
.I stdout
, 
.I stdout
cannot be used for the produced PDF file.  This should not be a major inconvenience since the PDF format is not suited for stream editing anyway.  Consider using the --out option when the input is taken from 
.I stdin
.


					


.B "--debuglog"
.I file
.br
.B "--debuglog-stderr"
.br
.B "--debuglog-stdout"
.br
Specify file for the user's debug log messages.


				
.SS Tolerances and other parameters

					


.B "--seed"
.I s
.br
Initializes the global random number generator by calling the srand function..


					


.B "--arcdelta"
.I length
.br
Set maximum integration step length to use when integrating along paths.  Defaults to 0.1bp.  See also --dtmin.


					


.B "--dtmin"
.I low
.br
Set minimum integration step to use when integrating along paths.  Defaults to 1e-4.  See also --arcdelta.


					


.B "--dtminerror"
.br
.B "--no-dtminerror"
.br
Control whether bumping up too short steplengths in integration along paths shall be considered an error.  See also --dtmin.


.B Rationale:
By default, it is considered an error if a length-measuring loop over one simple cubic spline requires too small steps.  The number of steps required depends on the arc-delta setting.  However, if changing arc-delta is not what one wants, and one cannot create the spline using more points, then a last resort is to inhibit the error using this option.  Note, however, that evaluating a program this way may be a process that does not terminate, practically speaking.


					


.B "--splicingtol"
.I tol
.br
Tolerance used when a 3D scene is viewed in 2D.  Defaults to 1e-5bp.


					


.B "--overlaptol"
.I tol
.br
Tolerance used when a 3D scene is viewed in 2D.  Defaults to 1e-3bp.


					


.B "--fmguesserror"
.br
.B "--no-fmguesserror"
.br
Control whether guessing font metrics for (more or less) strange characters shall be considered an error.


				
.SS Verbosity

					


.B "--bytecolumn"
.br
Report source file columns in bytes rather than complete UTF-8 characters.  By default, column indicates the character count from the beginning of the line.


					


.B "--unit"
.I unit-name
.br
Set the unit to use for textual representation of lengths.  Defaults to cm.


					


.B "--showfiles"
.br
Print the chain of used sources.


					


.B "--stats"
.br
.B "--no-stats"
.br
Control printing of execution statistics, such as memory and time usage.


				
.SS Versions

					


.B "--v"
.I mode-ver
.br
.BI "-v" "mode-ver
.br
Set the highest PDF version to use in output.  The mode-ver parameter shall begin with either of the letters "e" (error), "w" (warning), or "s" (silent).  The letter tells how the compiler shall react when it is not allowed to use a requested feature in the output, and must consider using a simpler replacement.  After the letter, a PDF version shall follow.  Valid values are "1.3" and "1.3".  Hence, for instance, "w1.3" is a valid mode-ver value.


					


.B "--version"
.br
Print version information about the compiler, and exit.


				
.SS Preview
Shapes can launch xpdf or invoke the MacOS 
.B open
command to show the resulting graphics.  In a future version, it may be possible to specify an arbitrary command to be issued, which could look like this:


.br  
shapes --viewer 'open -a TeXShop %' myfile.shapes


.br

					


.B "--open"
.br
Use the open program to open the result using a system default viewer for PDF files.


					


.B "--open-a"
.I program
.br
Like --open, but here the application to use is specified by the user.


					


.B "--xpdf"
.br
Use the xpdf program to preview the result.  The program is run in remote server mode.


					


.B "--xpdf-remote"
.I name
.br
Set the name to use when running the xpdf program in remote mode.  Defaults to the output filename.


					


.B "--xpdf-no-server"
.I name
.br
Inhibit use of the remote server mode.  A new xpdf window will appear each time.


					


.B "--xpdf-reload"
.br
Make the xpdf server reload rather than raise.


					


.B "--xpdf-quit"
.br
Make the xpdf server quit rather than show your graphics.


				
.SS User level debugging

					


.B "--no-backtrace"
.br
Turn off the backtrace printed when the program reports a runtime error.


					


.B "--evaltrace"
.br
Print information about each expression about to be evaluated.


					


.B "--evalbacktrace"
.br
As --evaltrace, but with a backtrace printed along with each expression.


				
.SS Compiler developer debugging

					


.B "--shapesdebug"
.br
Turn on debug prints in the Shapes lexer.


					


.B "--yydebug"
.br
Same as --shapesdebug.


					


.B "--systemdebug"
.br
Turn on system debug messages.  The messages are written to stderr.


					


.B "--afmdebug"
.br
Turn on debug prints in the font metrics scanner.  Primarily for development use.  See also --afmmessages.


					


.B "--afmmessages"
.br
Turn on font metrics debug messages.  The messages are written to stderr.


					


.B "--debugstep"
.I step
.br
Set the debug step counter.  For compiler development only.


				
.SS Garbage collection
In the end, when garbage collection is implemented, there will be options for controlling the gc behavior here.  At the moment, there is only a dummy option here.


					


.B "--no-memclean"
.br
Inhibit cleaning up memory before terminating the compilation process.


.B Rationale:
If the program seems to do stupid things after completing evaluation, it is possible that the cleaning-up process has caused a double free or access to freed memory.  While waiting for a fix, the problem can be handled by specifying this option, and thereby omitting the clean-up process entirely.


				
.SS File requests

 					


.B "--which-in"
.br
Request the input source.


 					


.B "--which-out"
.br
Request the input source.


 					


.B "--which-texjob"
.br
Request the TeX job basename.


 					


.B "--which-labeldb"
.br
Request the label database to keep generated labels between iterations.


 					


.B "--which-afmout"
.br
Request the file where generated font metrics will be stored.


					


.B "--which"
.I source
.br
Request a particular file.


				
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Basic use
Suppose there is a source called 
.I hi.shape
in the current working directory.  Then there are three ways to specify this file to the compiler.  One may give the full filename:


.br  
  shapes hi.shape


.br
or just to the point your shell completion will take you:


.br  
  shapes hi.


.br
or exclude the suffix altogether:


.br  
  shapes hi


.br

.SS Use with xpdf
To use the xpdf program for preview, the previous example can be extended as:


.br  
  shapes --xpdf hi.shape


.br

.SS Use with stdin
The following can be used to generate a small PDF-label from a LaTeX string, without littering the current working directory with the LaTeX-related files:


.br  
echo '#page << (TeX ("$x^{2}$"))' | shapes --tmpdir /tmp --out label.pdf


.br

.SS The test suite
When testing the compiler on the bundled tests, the compiler is invoked something like this:


.br  
shapes --no-resources --needpath ../../resources/extensions/ --fontmetricspath ../../resources/fontmetrics/ \\
.br
       --tmpdir tmp/ --outdir out/ hello.shape


.br
The first three options ensure that extension files and font metrics are not used from a previous installation.  This example assumes that environment variables are not used to provide search paths.


.SH AUTHOR
Most of the code was written by Henrik Tidefelt.  Portability and distribution was provided by Gustaf Hendeby.


.SH SEE ALSO
.BR "xpdf" "(1)"
.BR "open" "(1)"
